Stlc theory (#454)
the1lab/1lab: src/Lang/STLC/Named.lagda.md

  h _ = `tt
```

</details>

We must then define a relation to assign types to expressions, which
we will notate `Γ ⊢ tm ⦂ ty`{.Agda}, for "a term $\rm{tm}$ has type $\rm{ty}$
in the context $\Gamma$":

<!--
```agda
infix 3 _⊢_⦂_
```
-->

```agda
data _⊢_⦂_ : Ctx → Expr → Ty → Type where
```

We say that a variable $n$ has a type $\tau$ in context $\Gamma$
if `lookup Γ n ≡ just τ`{.Agda}.

```agda
  `var-intro : ∀ {Γ τ} (n : String)
             → lookup n Γ ≡ just τ
             → Γ ⊢ ` n ⦂ τ
```

For lambda abstraction, if an expression $\text{body}$ extended with a variable $v$
of type $\tau$ has type $\rho$, we say that $λ\, v.\,\text{body}$ has type
$\tau \to \rho$. We call this constructor `\`⇒-intro`{.Agda} as it "introduces"
the arrow type.

```agda
  `⇒-intro : ∀ {Γ n body τ ρ}
           → Γ ∷c (n , τ) ⊢ body ⦂ ρ
           → Γ ⊢ `λ n body ⦂ τ `⇒ ρ
```

If an expression $f$ has type $\tau \to \rho$, and
an expression $x$ has type $\tau$, then the application $f\, x$
has type $\rho$.

We name it `\`⇒-elim`{.Agda} as it "eliminates" the arrow type.

```agda
  `⇒-elim : ∀ {Γ f x τ ρ}
          → Γ ⊢ f ⦂ τ `⇒ ρ
          → Γ ⊢ x ⦂ τ
          → Γ ⊢ f `$ x ⦂ ρ
```

> The rest of the formers follow these patterns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of the inference rules follow this pattern.
```

_[_:=_] : Expr → String → Expr → Expr
```

If a variable x is equal to the variable we are substituting for, n,
we return the new expression. Else, the variable unchanged.

```agda
` x [ n := e ] with x ≡? n
... | yes _ = e
... | no _ = ` x
```

This substitution is not capture avoiding. This causes issues if
the terms are not alpha distinct!

```agda
`λ x f [ n := e ] with x ≡? n
... | yes _ = `λ x f
... | no _ = `λ x (f [ n := e ])
```

In all other cases, we simply "move" the substitution into all
subexpressions. (Or, do nothing.)

```agda
f `$ x [ n := e ] = (f [ n := e ]) `$ (x [ n := e ])
`⟨ a , b ⟩ [ n := e ] = `⟨ a [ n := e ] , b [ n := e ] ⟩
`π₁ a [ n := e ] = `π₁ (a [ n := e ])
`π₂ a [ n := e ] = `π₂ (a [ n := e ])
`tt [ n := e ] = `tt
```

Now, we define our step relation proper. Each of these step relations
is properly referred to as a "reduction rule".

```agda
data _↦_ : Expr → Expr → Type where
```

The act of turning an application $(λ\,y. y)\,x$ into $x$ is called
β-reduction for lambda terms. We require $x$ to be a value in order
to keep reduction deterministic -- this will be elaborated on in
a moment.

```agda
  β-λ : ∀ {n body x body[n:=x]}
      → is-value x

>       → body[n:=x] ≡ (body [ n := x ])

Reviewer: This sort of green slime prevention can be made a bit easier if you define substitution as a functional relation, but I'm not sure if this is the right move here. Food for thought!

Author: Still trying to figure this out 😅 
Happily willing to add another version in this direction though!

      → ((`λ n body) `$ x) ↦ (body[n:=x])
```

Likewise, reducing projections on a pair is called β-reduction for
pairs.

```agda
  β-π₁ : ∀ {a b} → (`π₁ `⟨ a , b ⟩) ↦ a
  β-π₂ : ∀ {a b} → (`π₂ `⟨ a , b ⟩) ↦ b
```

We also have two reductions that can step "inside" projections, which
we will call ξ rules.

```agda
  ξ-π₁ : ∀ {a₁ a₂}
       → a₁ ↦ a₂
       → (`π₁ a₁) ↦ (`π₁ a₂)

  ξ-π₂ : ∀ {a₁ a₂}
       → a₁ ↦ a₂
       → (`π₂ a₁) ↦ (`π₂ a₂)
```

Likewise, we have one that can step inside an application, on
the left hand side.

```agda
  ξ-$ₗ : ∀ {f₁ f₂ x}
       → f₁ ↦ f₂
       → (f₁ `$ x) ↦ (f₂ `$ x)
```

We also include a rule for reduction on the right hand side, requiring
the left to be a value first. This, combined with the value requirement
of the `β-λ`{.Agda} rule, keep our evaluation **deterministic**, forcing
that evaluation should take place from left to right. We will prove
this later.

```agda
  ξ-$ᵣ : ∀ {f x₁ x₂}
       → is-value f
       → x₁ ↦ x₂
       → (f `$ x₁) ↦ (f `$ x₂)
```

These are all of our reduction rules! The STLC is indeed very simple.
We can now show that, say, an identity function applied to something
reduces properly:

<!--
```agda

> private module Example-2 where

Reviewer: Let's try to avoid polluting the scope of this module.

```suggestion
private module Example-2 where private
```

```
-->

```agda
  our-id : Expr
  our-id = `λ "x" (` "x")

  pair : Expr
  pair = `⟨ `tt , `tt ⟩

  id-app-step : (our-id `$ pair) ↦ pair
  id-app-step = β-λ v-⟨,⟩ refl
```

<!-- [TODO: Wren, 13/06/2025]  Refl Trans closure of _↦_ -->

## The big two properties

The two "big" properties about the STLC we wish to prove are called
**progress** and **preservation**. Progress states that any
given term is either done (a value), or can take another step.
Preservation states that if a well typed expression $x$ reduces to another $x'$,
they have the same type (i.e., reduction preserves types.)

The first step in proving these is showing that a "proper" substitution
preserves types. If a term $tm$ has type $\tau$ when extended
with a variable $n$ of type $\rho$, then substituting any expression
of type $\rho$ for $n$ preserves the type of $tm$. To prove this,
we first show that renaming preserves types - if $\Gamma$ and $\Delta$
are contexts, and for every lookup in $\Gamma$, $\Delta$ gives the
same type, then any term with a type under $\Gamma$ has the same
type under $\Delta$.

```agda
rename
  : ∀ {Γ Δ}

>   → (∀ n ty → lookup n Γ ≡ just ty → lookup n Δ ≡ just ty)

Reviewer: Type alias for renamings?

Author: Is `is-renaming G D` suitable?

```agda
rename {Γ} {Δ} f (`λ x tm) ty (`⇒-intro {τ = τ} {ρ = ρ} Γ⊢) = `⇒-intro (rename f' tm ρ Γ⊢)
  where
    f' : (n : String) (ty : Ty) →
          lookup n (Γ ∷c (x , τ)) ≡ just ty →
          lookup n (Δ ∷c (x , τ)) ≡ just ty
    f' n ty Γ≡ with n ≡? x
    ... | yes x≡n = Γ≡
    ... | no p = f n ty Γ≡
```

Everything else is straightforward, as in the substitution case.

```agda
rename {Γ} {Δ} f (f' `$ x) ty (`⇒-elim {τ = τ} Γ⊢₁ Γ⊢₂) =
  `⇒-elim (rename f f' (τ `⇒ ty) Γ⊢₁) (rename f x τ Γ⊢₂)

rename {Γ} {Δ} f `⟨ a , b ⟩ ty (`×-intro {τ = τ} {ρ = ρ} Γ⊢₁ Γ⊢₂) =
  `×-intro (rename f a τ Γ⊢₁) (rename f b ρ Γ⊢₂)

rename {Γ} {Δ} f (`π₁ tm) ty (`×-elim₁ {ρ = ρ} Γ⊢) = `×-elim₁ (rename f tm (ty `× ρ) Γ⊢)
rename {Γ} {Δ} f (`π₂ tm) ty (`×-elim₂ {τ = τ} Γ⊢) = `×-elim₂ (rename f tm (τ `× ty) Γ⊢)
rename {Γ} {Δ} f `tt ty `tt-intro = `tt-intro
```

Another few lemmas! This time about shuffling and dropping names
in the context.

```agda
duplicates-are-ok
  : ∀ {Γ n t₁ t₂ bd typ}
  → Γ ∷c (n , t₂) ∷c (n , t₁) ⊢ bd ⦂ typ
  → Γ ∷c (n , t₁) ⊢ bd ⦂ typ
variable-swap
  : ∀ {Γ n k t₁ t₂ bd typ}
  → ¬ n ≡ k
  → Γ ∷c (n , t₁) ∷c (k , t₂) ⊢ bd ⦂ typ
  → Γ ∷c (k , t₂) ∷c (n , t₁) ⊢ bd ⦂ typ
```

> <details>

Reviewer: A `<details>` block should have a `<summary>` describing it.

<!--
```agda
open import 1Lab.HLevel.Closure
open import 1Lab.Prelude

open import Data.Maybe
open import Data.Bool
open import Data.List
open import Data.Dec
open import Data.Nat
open import Data.Sum
```
-->

```agda
module Lang.STLC.Named where
```

# The simply-typed lambda calculus

The simple-typed lamdba calclus (STLC) is an example of one of the smallest
"useful" typed programming languages. While very simple, and lacking
features that would make it useful for real programming, its small
size makes it very appealing for the demonstration of programming
language formalization.

This file represents the first in a series, exploring several
different approaches to formalizing various properties of the STLC.
We will start with the most "naive" approach, and build off it to
more advanced approaches.

First, the types of the STLC: the Unit type, products, and functions.

```agda

> data Ty : Type where

Reviewer 2: I like `Ty`, and it's consistent with `Cat.CartesianClosed.Lambda`.

> data Ty : Type where

Reviewer: I just can't help but read it as "Thank you" lol. If Ty is used elsewhere then let's stick with that. Might be good to add some of these conventions to CONTRIBUTING.md, along with some indentation guides.

> data Ty : Type where

Author: I personally prefer `Ty`, but i'm not super concerned one way or another. I could add a note that `Tp` is also commonly used?

  `⊤ : Ty
  _`×_ : Ty → Ty → Ty
  _`⇒_ : Ty → Ty → Ty
```

We model contexts as (snoc) lists of pairs, alongside a partial
index function. We use `∷c`{.Agda} as the "reversed" list constructor
to avoid confusion about insertion order.
Sequels to this file will use more advanced techniques to avoid
this partiality, but it's alright for right now.

```agda
Con : Type

> Con = List (Nat × Ty)

Author: Probably not very. I can't quite remember why I went with nats in the first place, so I'll modify that.

For right now, we note that a value is something that cannot be
reduced further - in our case, variables, lambda abstractions, pairs,
and unit.

```agda
data Value : Expr → Type where
  v-λ : ∀ {n body} → Value (`λ n body)
  v-⟨,⟩ : ∀ {a b} → Value (`⟨ a , b ⟩)
  v-⊤ : Value `tt
```

Our next goal is to now define a "step" relation,
which dictates that a term $x$ may, through a reduction, step to
another expression $x'$ that represents one "step" of evaluation.

        
This is how we will
define the evaluation of our expressions. Before we can define
stepping, we need to define substitution, so that we may turn an
expression like $(\lambda x. f\,x) y$ into $f\,y$. We notate the
substitution of a variable $n$ for an expression $e$ in another
expression $f$ as `f [ n := e ]`{.Agda}. It's worth noting that the
substitution we implement is actually not correct in general, due to
a problem called variable capture.

<details>
```agda
data ExprD : Type where
     Dpart : Nat → ExprD
     D : Nat → ExprD
     Dλ : ExprD → ExprD
     D$ : ExprD → ExprD → ExprD
     D, : ExprD → ExprD → ExprD
     Dp₁ : ExprD → ExprD
     Dp₂ : ExprD → ExprD
     Dtt : ExprD

> find-index : List Nat → Nat → Maybe Nat

Reviewer 2: This should be implementable in terms of `lookup` and `enumerate` (possibly after swapping some products).
